# KukulaHipp
ENV 872 Course Project for K. Kukula and S. Hipp

Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, 2025

## Summary

This repository contains all materials (data, analysis, final report) used to assess the environmental impacts of the removal of the Elwha and Glines Canyon dams along the Elwha River in Washington State.

Removal of the Elwha River dams began in 2011 and concluded in 2014. This repository contains several datasets measuring environmental impacts before removal (2006–2011), during removal (2011–2014), and after removal (2014–2017). Data were collected from a range of sources, including the USGS Water Data for the Nation and academic publications available through the USGS ScienceBase repository. Our analysis (and the associated datasets) focuses on environmental impacts in four main areas: streamflow, sediment levels, water quality, and salmon diet. 

## Investigators

- Sylvia Hipp, MEM '27
- Kaitlyn Kukula, MEM '27

## Keywords

Elwha River, Dam Removal, Elwha Dam, Glines Canyon Dam, water quality, salmon diet, sediment

## Database Information

All datasets are located in the following folder: `~/KukulaHipp/Data/Raw/`

- 
<describe the origin of all data in the repository, including data collected from outside sources and new data generated by the investigator(s). If data was accessed from an outside database, the date(s) of data access should also be included.>


## Folder structure, file formats, and naming conventions 


<describe the folders contained in the repository, including what type of files they contain>

<describe the formats of files for the various purposes contained in the repository>

<describe your file naming conventions>

## Metadata

<For each data file in the repository, describe the data contained in each column. Include the column name, a description of the information, the class of data, and any units associated with the data. Create a list or table for each data file.> 

## Scripts and code

- `KukulaHipp_FinalProject.Rmd`: Markdown file used to create the final report. This script includes all data wrangling, exploration, and analysis that are part of our final report.
    * Authors: S. Hipp and K. Kukula 
- All scripts in the folder `~/KukulaHipp/Analysis` were used to perform the data wranging and analysis of the different components of our final report. 
    * `Chinook_Diet.Rmd` (Author: K. Kukula) analyzes Chinook Salmon diets
    * `Coho_Diet.Rmd` (Author: K. Kukula) analyzes Coho Salmon diets
    * `Discharge_GageHeight.Rmd` (Author: S. Hipp) explores discharge and gage height data available from USGS and performs initial time series analysis of the data
    * `Elwha_Maps.Rmd`
    * `Sediment_Load_and_Concentrations.Rmd`
- All scripts in the folder `~/KukulaHipp/Exploratory` were used for the initial exploratory analysis that identified the focus and scope of our analyses.
    * `Hipp_Elwha_Exploratory.Rmd`: Exploratory analysis of S. Hipp
    * `Kukula_Elwha_Exploratory.Rmd`: Exploratory analysis of K. Kukula